# File Meanings

**gdb_command.txt** is the flip commands that will execute in gdb, it is generated by gdb.py

**gdb.py** use iomem.txt to generates gdb_command.txt and simulate the bits flip by running gdb.sh in a while loop.

**get_iomem.sh** run in qemu guest machine, it will generates iomem.txt

**iomem.txt** is the /proc/iomem in qemu guest machine. It is generated by the execution of **get_iomem.sh**

**gdb.txt** will be created after the execution of **gdb.py**. It is the gdb logging file.

**gdb.sh** will be execute by gdb.py using python3 `subprocess.run()`

**gdb/fliputils.py** provides some user-defined commands for gdb.

# Usage

Simulate the random bits flip in qemu guest machine with gdb.

# Tutorial

## Clone this repo in somewhere

Run `git clone https://github.com/yexuanyang/flip_simulation.git` or `git clone git@github.com:yexuanyang/flip_simulation.git`

Store the repo somewhere.

## Make sure your QEMU and Kernel both support 9p shared filesystem

### Download QEMU from the source (one optional way to support 9p)

Run these commands in bash to install QEMU from the source. QEMU source tar is obtained from its official website.

```bash
wget https://download.qemu.org/qemu-7.1.0.tar.xz –no-check-certificate
xz -d qemu-7.1.0.tar.xz
tar -xvf qemu-7.1.0.tar
cd qemu-7.1.0/
apt-get install -y gcc make  ninja-build libglib2.0-dev libmount-dev  meson git  libfdt-dev libpixman-1-dev zlib1g-dev libcap-ng-dev libattr1-dev
mkdir build
cd build
../configure --enable-kvm --enable-virtfs
make -j$(nproc)
make install
qemu-system-aarch64 --version
```

### Make kernel with this config (one optional way to support 9p)

Enter `make LLVM=1 menuconfig` in the root directory of the kernel source. enter `/` to search these configs and open them.

```text
CONFIG_9P_FS=y
CONFIG_9P_FS_POSIX_ACL=y
CONFIG_9P_FS_SECURITY=y
CONFIG_NETWORK_FILESYSTEMS=y
CONFIG_NET_9P=y
CONFIG_NET_9P_DEBUG=y （Optional）
CONFIG_NET_9P_VIRTIO=y

For aarch64, also add:
CONFIG_PCI=y
CONFIG_PCI_HOST_COMMON=y
CONFIG_PCI_HOST_GENERIC=y
CONFIG_VIRTIO_PCI=y
CONFIG_VIRTIO_BLK=y
CONFIG_VIRTIO_NET=y
```

### Mount 9p fs when qemu boot

Add `-virtfs local,path=/path/to/share,mount_tag=host0,security_model=passthrough,id=host0` or `-fsdev local,security_model=passthrough,id=fsdev0,path=<path-to-shared-dir-in-host> -device virtio-9p-pci,id=fs0,fsdev=fsdev0,mount_tag=hostshare`
after your qemu boot command to use 9p fs. I recommend the first way.

Then interacting with the qemu guest machine tty console, run `mount -t 9p -o trans=virtio,version=9p2000.L host0 /mnt/shared` to mount 9p fs in directory `/mnt/shared`.

You can also add a new line `host0 /mnt/shared 9p trans=virtio,version=9p2000.L 0 0` at the end of `/etc/fstab` to make the qemu mount 9p automatically.

## Start the qemu gdb server and qemu monitor 

### Start gdb server when qemu boot

Add `-s -S` at the end of your boot command will start a gdb server at `localhost:1234` and wait for gdb to continue. Run `gdb -ex 'target remote:1234'` to attach the server. Enter `continue` will make the kernel boot.

### Start qemu monitor when qemu boot
Append `-monitor unix:/tmp/qemu_socket,server,nowait` to your boot command, it will start a `qemu monitor` which can be connected by socket file `/tmp/qemu_socket` using `socat -,echo=0,icanon=0 /tmp/qemu_socket` or `nc -U /tmp/qemu_socket`. And you can send a single command to qemu monitor using `echo "info status" | socat - /tmp/qemu_socket`. 

**Note:** The socket file `/tmp/qemu_socket` will be created automatically, you should make sure the filename is unique. Do not change this filename, the script will use this filename to connect to qemu monitor. 

## Prepare a qcow2 format disk image
Qemu support many format disk image, like `raw`, `qcow2`, etc. Because we use `loadvm` and `savevm` in qemu monitor, so we need a `qcow2` format disk image.

Basically, you can convert a raw ext4 image to qcow2 image by `qemu-img convert -f raw -O qcow2 <source filename>.img <dest filename>.qcow2`. Note that the boot command maybe change when you use a different format disk image.

Reference:
1. [qemu.org QEMU disk image utility: qemu-img convert](https://www.qemu.org/docs/master/tools/qemu-img.html#cmdoption-qemu-img-arg-convert)
2. [openstack qemu-img convert: raw, qcow2, qed, vdi, vmdk, vhd](https://docs.openstack.org/image-guide/convert-images.html#qemu-img-convert-raw-qcow2-qed-vdi-vmdk-vhd)


## Put the repo in the shared directory

Just `cp` or `mv` the code you cloned before to the shared directory.

## Inject the faults in the qemu guest machine

### Method-1: Run scripts in sequence

Firstly run `get_iomem.sh` in qemu guest machine to get `iomem.txt`

Secondly run `python3 gdb.py` in the host machine to simulate the bits flip. 

Thirdly run `python3 snap.py` in the host machine to tests the failure rate of a machine after a single particle flip occurs and the machine runs for a period of time.

**Note**: Detach gdb server before `python3 gdb.py`, otherwise it will blocked because 1234 port is used.

**Note**: You can modify `gdb.py` to change the flip area, the flip bits, the flip times, etc.

### Method-2: Use the user-defined commands in gdb

Firstly run `get_iomem.sh` in qemu guest machine to get `iomem.txt`

Secondly run `gdb` in the host machine and run `source gdb/fliputils.py` in gdb to load the user-defined commands.

Thirdly use `autoinject` or `snapinject` in gdb to simulate the bits flip.

**Note**: More details about the user-defined commands can be found in `gdb/fliputils.py`.

## Store the panic message when kernel panic

In QEMU, run `echo 8 > /proc/sys/kernel/printk` to get all message in stdout.

Before start QEMU, add `| tee <some-file>` at the end of command to store all content that showed in stdout and that you put in stdin in QEMU at file `<some-file>`.

# Latency & Overhead between different flipping methods

Currently, the forms of simulated flipping include external flipping using scripts and built-in flipping mode using user-defined commands in gdb. The granularity of the interval between two flippings of external flipping can only reach the second level, while the granularity of the interval between two flippings of built-in flipping can reach the millisecond level. Because built-in flipping is implemented using gdb python api and QEMU's built-in timer, the only error is that after the QEMU built-in timer times out, the callback function needs to be executed, and then QEMU returns to the paused state, which takes about 50us. Because external flipping uses scripts to execute gdb to connect to QEMU's gdbserver or uses gdbcontroller in the pygdbmi library to connect to gdbserver to execute the corresponding commands, the delay of the two operations is tens or hundreds of milliseconds. However, the external method takes less time to complete the flip than the built-in method. For example, it takes more than 20s to execute `autoinject 10 20ns 100ns ram` in GDB, but it only takes more than 10s to use the external method. If you need to specify a fine-grained flipping interval, it is recommended to use the GDB command method. If this is not necessary, it is recommended to use a faster external reversal method.